All of the bubble activity.
Alright, so keep filming because now he's going to...
(water splashing)
(speaking in foreign language)
- Can you smell it?
- Oh wow, yeah, I smell it.
- Yeah, it's important to you.
- Oh, it's like a tropical.
- Yeah, you can smell it.
[SIDE CONVERSATION]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
It's a good drink?
It's like papaya mango.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
A bit of aroma.
How does it taste?
Juice.
Delicious.
It's like mousse.
Yeah, you can taste the mousse if you want.
It's actually kind of sweet.
[SIDE CONVERSATION]
Kind of sparkling.
(people talking)
- It's still increasing.
It's starting to ferment, but there's always a regeneration.
There's still more yeast reproducing.
- Okay.
(laughing)
- We should have said you can replace.
(people chattering)
(speaking in foreign language)
I have dropped my phone in a fermentation tank before.
- You have?
- Yes, I have.
(laughing)
It has happened.
You get a lot more microbes that way.
(laughing)
- How was the coffee?
[Laughter]
25.7 temperature hour
in La Orea
[Inaudible]
So this before was hotter on the outside, warmer on the inside because we have the black,
the sun was kind of warming it up.
And now it's lift and it's cooler on the outside than on the inside.
So this was a short amount of time, it's a small amount of copy and it's still a significant
temperature change.
So again, imagine bigger tanks multiplied, more variability.
[inaudible]
[Spanish]
[INAUDIBLE]
How much is it?
Five.
All right.
It used to be $7, right?
At the beginning?
OK.
[INAUDIBLE]
Check the bag.
Oh, OK, five?
Yeah.
[inaudible]
[Spanish]
(I was looking for 5 bricks, but I couldn't find it)
[ Inaudible ]
So really simple dissolved oxygen meter. This is your question.
It's a dissolved oxygen meter. So in air we're about 20% oxygen.
All right so this is what my meter says 20.7.
So this has not been
has not been sealed. It's been pretty open and we mixed it.
Let's see where we're at.
It's gonna take... Is that like at the bottom or in the middle? It's kind of in the
middle. I can't quite get to the bottom. It keeps wanting to float up and fight
me, so I'm not quite at the bottom. I would say I'm like...
Well, you can see how far my arm went down. Not that far. So it's gonna take a little
bit to come down.
So we're gonna let this go down. So we started 7 days now at 40.
And now we need the lactic.
[ Inaudible ]
>> And what's the significance of the dissolved oxygen?
>> What's the what?
the significance of the dissolved oxygen?
So the question is, is it an anaerobic fermentation?
Anaerobic is without oxygen. We're measuring oxygen.
Ah, okay.
So what I showed in the beginning was that air was at 20.
Yeah.
And so now we're just seeing, we're putting it in here.
And comparing.
To see, yeah, where we're at.
But meanwhile, so it's going down very slowly.
So in the meantime, there's that bag.
And we can check out...
This is lactic?
- Our last duck, yeah.
'Cause I grew a little bit.
You can come see how this kind of smells differently
than that one.
(people talking)
[ Background noise ]
>> First look at the dice first.
[ Laughter ]
>> You taste it?
>> Yeah.
>> How about it?
>> It's salty.
(laughing)
- Oh yeah, this is the one we added salt.
I mean, I would like eating more of it.
(laughing)
But it looks really dry at the top.
- But for the landing bacteria, I mean,
does it produce any aroma?
- It's just less active.
it's going a little slower because this is a bigger fermentation
it's a lot more..
oh, OK
it's by liquid, right?
very nice
you can boil it
all the water is at the bottom
yea, let me wash my hands and I'll see if it's mixed yet
it's like a bubble
((BURMESE)) You're Burmese?
yea
oh, I saw a bubble
hahahahhaha
Yeah.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
OK, I'm going to stick my hand in.
It's very, very warm.
Oh, there it goes.
Oh.
So this bubbles from the fermentation?
Mm-hmm.
That looks so cool.
Whatever, this is not ideal.
I could have put just like alcohol spray on my skin before sticking it in here because
because I just rinsed it after that one.
So do as I say, not as I do.
[LAUGHTER]
[INAUDIBLE]
No.
[LAUGHTER]
So I can tell you that the top was a lot warmer
than the bottom.
So I'm glad that I'm mixing.
We're going to take our measurements.
It does taste salty.
You can stick your finger in there.
taste it? Sure!
(it reminds me of what? cucumber salad)
[chatter]
**I'm not sure what I said here**
**I'm trying to figure out what this is**
what is this?
peanuts
oh, this is
salt and oil peanuts
good thing it's not salty
it's salty
it's sweet
[ Inaudible ]
(laughing)
[INAUDIBLE]
About the same, about five.
Five, right?
How much is the Ricks?
Ricks.
4 and 1/2, about five.
I think it's basically both of them
are determined to have the same, because the previous one was
[inaudible]
[Spanish] I want to keep it in a warmer place. I don't want to leave it outside.
[Spanish] We have to put it back inside because it's going to be hot here in the winter.
[Spanish] The temperature is going to be higher inside the cabin.
[Spanish] We're measuring the car.
[Spanish] Yes.
[INAUDIBLE]
[BLANK_AUDIO]
[Street noise]
(indistinct chatter)
[ Inaudible ]
>> Did you measure anything?
>> Yeah, I measured this one already.
>> How much?
>> Who has the--
[ Inaudible ]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(inaudible)
Not yet. Right now we're at six.
So you've been saying that under -- everything under one.
So technically for production purposes, for like making a
we consider anything under 2 anaerobic.
Right, so the air was at 20, and this is at 5.8 and dropping.
So there's a lot less oxygen, even though it's open,
even though it's never been sealed and never been closed,
and we mixed it vigorously to get our measurement,
we're still pretty anaerobic.
We're at 5.6 and dropping.
Like, it's still taking a slow measurement.
What you can consider anaerobic is the low tube.
And how does that, microbial processes going on, there's a lot of anaerobic mutation happening, but the entire...
So we're going to talk about that too, because there's three different layers.
layers. There's the fermentation, the metabolism of fermentation is an anaerobic process. We
don't use oxygen as an electron donor. Then you have the environment. So even if your
fermentation is anaerobic, the conditions that it's in, so is it on a raised bed, completely
exposed to oxygen, or is it submerged underwater? So the environment can be either more, that's
So that's why I like to differentiate between anoxic and oxygen filled.
So, because we're talking about different things.
Then the third layer is your microbes.
So even if your fermentation is anaerobic by definition,
and you are in an aerobic environment, like in a natural process, there's lots of air,
then you still have the microbe, whether it's metabolism, it prefers oxygen, or it doesn't.
The problem is we collapse it all into "Oh, is it anaerobic?"
And it's like, "Well, what are you talking about?"
Are you talking about the metabolism? Are you talking about the environment?
Or are you talking about the identity of the microbe that's doing the action?
So there's three different layers.
And not that you need to know them, but it's just like, again, we kind of throw out these terms.
And they are very...
Okay, we're now at 4.8.
So we're getting very close to an anaerobic.
even if it's completely open.
So, yeah.
Do you have a question?
Yeah.
So, usually when we say anaerobic fermentation,
we're just trying to communicate how it is.
Usually.
So, what would be different if I, like,
immobilized bubblers in a fish tank?
Like, I just threw a bunch of those in there,
picked it up to pure oxygen and just...
What would that change? So it would change... it's sort of like
we put salt in here so that we selected for some
and suppress others. So if you add a lot of oxygen
that way, like a stone, like they do, they aerate rain tanks, they aerate
beer tanks or a fish tank, then you're selecting for some
and suppressing others. So it's the same as adding salt here.
So we'll talk more about oxygen later.
Tomorrow.
And this might be a silly question, but there's liquid here, so I would assume H2O, like when
we're talking about oxygen going away, is it being taken out of H2O?
Like I don't know how to ask that.
What is this measuring and what is the issue?
So we have dissolved oxygen in our air,
which we know is about 20%.
Most of air is actually nitrogen, not oxygen.
So oxygen, that's what we saw was our 20%.
But then you have dissolved oxygen in water.
So we can measure our water.
And when I've measured the water here, it's about like a nine.
Like just water has less oxygen than our air,
but it's still pretty high.
So here, we're having this fermentation.
All of these bubbles are producing carbon dioxide,
so it's displacing the available oxygen.
There's still going to be H2O bound together.
That's not available.
But the oxygen that is liberated is being displaced
with the carbon dioxide, so that's how you get this lowering.
It's not like water's disappearing.
Especially, I mean, it could evaporate off.
At some level, if we leave this open,
it is going to evaporate out.
So it's not necessarily disappearing.
It's like what you can measure and what's found.
What's available and what is...
We might get closer, 3.9.
But we can also cover (speaking in foreign language)
So I'm going to leave this here and let's...
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
So that's not measuring oxygen that's part of other molecules, it's just measuring free oxygen.
Dissolve free oxygen.
So we'll see what it is after dinner.
So the point of this is to show that anaerobic, Angela is...
Bullshit.
Keep in mind.
So anaerobic here, like even, it doesn't have to do with like the show of the CLK.
Like when you have this fermentation and you have this bubble, the fermentation itself is creating, displacing oxygen and becoming...
Anaerobic.
And becoming anaerobic.
Without you, you don't have to do anything.
You don't have to purge with nitrogen gas.
I've seen some producers put in a candle inside of a barrel to consume the oxygen.
I don't love that method, but it makes sense to put a candle inside of a coffee, a lit candle.
So you can do all of these things, like buy a tank of CO2 and purge the container to get that anaerobic,
or you do nothing and you get there anyway.
It's done.
That's what happens.
[ Inaudible ]
>> It's because of the activity of the microbes.
So they consume the oxygen and produce carbon, right?
>> And actually with submerge,
you would actually have more dissolved oxygen.
The water has H2O, dissolved oxygen in your water.
So if you had it dry, we didn't submerge it,
but at least covered it, and you had some activity,
then the gas, the CO2 is still displacing and you might be able to get anaerobic faster than submerged with underwater.
So pretty close, we're 3.3. And that's again, opening it up and mixing it.
The fermentation is so active and so strong that all the CO2 is just creating an anaerobic environment anyway, on its own.
So this is not true of like every single fermentation ever, just this yeast is very vigorous and it's very active.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
Will it dissolve the oxygen?
With a lot of air, or if we leave it distilled or with water in it, it has less oxygen and less humidity.
So, it depends.
What's the pH of water?
Two stuff.
So if we had had another tank that would be done exactly the same way and had seals that are completely tight, just based on the ethanol,
or ethanolic, or whatever, at the end would the predictability be any different at all?
Not really.
For me, with this yeast, because it's so vigorous and it acts so quickly, with this yeast and that method, I don't see a difference.
It could be something like this, like again, this is much slower, we're not seeing as much activity, so there could be a difference.
So that's kind of my point with a lot of producers, it's like you could do all that effort, or you could not.
But it's not really doing anything.
And you could just get to the same point anyway. Yeah.
So a lot of the times it's like, oh, but I have to justify myself to the buyer, I have to show them all the work that I'm doing.
But at the end of the day, in the cup, it's very minimal influence.
I just don't want producers to struggle so much, but you don't have to struggle.
It's going to stay like this. We're probably going to wash it Thursday morning.
It's more like the flow, because tomorrow we have the cupping, so we're not going to wash it.
and then we're gonna go to the farm.
We're not gonna be sitting here washing a tent.
I wanna wash it in the morning.
So Thursday morning is just like,
it's like a personnel, like putting humans first.
I never put the fermentation first.
I was like, when is the most convenient time
that I feel like it?
No, especially with this yeast,
that's why I like it, have this buffer.
So if I do 32 hours of 40,
I'm gonna get really similar results.
But on something that's unknown, something like this,
32 or 40 hours, I'm really different.
So I like to use a SEMA because it gives me this buffer
that I don't have to like rush and wash my coffee.
Yeah, exactly.
It's not gonna like run away from me.
- Does that expand to the 300 or 500
or other permutations as well?
Like, do you have that same kind of flexibility?
- Well, I wouldn't do that long of a permutation
with this yeast.
So what happens if that's happening?
Who uses this as a go-to?
- I don't do those.
I don't do those if I can help it.
So yeah, I don't do a 300-hour fermentation
'cause I don't see the point and I don't see the benefit.
If I can get, I'm not saying it's not better,
but it's like I can do a 36-hour fermentation
and get 85, 86-point coffee,
or a 300-hour fermentation and get an 85.5-point coffee.
Like it's just not, it's so much more time
and it's diminishing returns.
So for me, I'm like, if I can get 80% of the way there,
like I'm good, let's move on.
No, that's a good point.
I still take my pH into consideration.
I'm still checking it.
I'm still seeing that it hasn't stalled.
I'm seeing that it hasn't like, caught up.
- It usually goes down, right?
- Usually goes down.
But in some moments it just stops.
Sometimes it can stall.
[laughter]
I don't know until I've tasted the coffee.
So sometimes a stall doesn't have an impact,
and sometimes a stall is a problem.
So I can't tell.
The only thing I can tell is if it goes back up.
That is definitely a problem,
and usually it's because the meter is uncalibrated.
It's very, very weird and difficult for it to just go back up in pH.
The pH will trend down or it will stall.
But is there like a window that you aim for?
I try to stay above 3, pH 3.
But I usually don't have to like, with this yeast, that's kind of my protection, that's my insurance.
It's like driving with your seatbelt on.
This is just, it's less risky.
But at the same time, because the yeast is acting more time.
time. More time would mean more of certain components I guess so the flavor will change
each day let's say. But so this is a live
like a live process so the microbes are alive so the yeast are producing more of a certain component
so it's getting more food I'm sorry it's eating more of the sugar and creating more of the acids
but there's other things in here that will eat those acids.
So it's not that the more time you have,
the more and more and more and more and more.
So now something else could come and eat that,
and then you could be having less and less and less and less and less,
the more time you go.
So more time doesn't correlate one-to-one
to having more intensity or more flavor.
It could be that you're breaking that down.
Something else can eat it.
[inaudible]
You can sterilize it and then it depends on the rest of your process because again every time I'm putting my hands in there,
every time I'm mixing, every time I'm not sterilizing this, when I'm putting it in, I'm always introducing more.
So sterilizing once is not enough when we're
constantly touching the top of it.
So there's the paddle, there's this plastic, you put this plastic on the ground, we rinsed it,
and we just sterilize the plastic and put the plastic back.
Does that make sense?
Where are we?
2.4?
Let's see how this one is.
I think this is kind of stabilized at 2.4.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
Is that what you were watching as the stabilization
of the measurements?
Or was it literally--
I think initially it was like down to below air.
It was stabilized.
And then the dropping, I think it was actually dropping because it was breathing.
It was actually producing more CO2 and dropping.
We're getting real time measurement of it dropping.
[chatter]
[Indistinct chatter]
Lower, lower. 2.2.
Hey! Yeah, Dan Arovik.
You did it!
1.9.
[ Inaudible ]
Not necessarily.
But it is a good sign.
Now, this would mean that, speaking in terms of oxygen,
not being anaerobic, we would have said that...
It cannot happen.
Acetic acid cannot be given without oxygen.
I remember that in one of the podcasts you said that in the case of levatures,
acetic acid can be given, but not as a primary result, but as a secondary one.
[inaudible]
It could be really good.
[ Inaudible ]
Okay, now we just wait for dinner.
15 minutes.
[BLANK_AUDIO]